La Monte Yarroll: I'm Lamont Henry Piggy Yarrell.
La Monte Yarroll: This is my Syracuse University Master's in Applied Data Science portfolio.
La Monte Yarroll: I'm a data hamster.
La Monte Yarroll: I've hoarded my own data for years.
La Monte Yarroll: Turning this data into actionable insights is a motivating factor in getting my degree in data science.
La Monte Yarroll: I'm going to discuss 3 projects that I did as part of my degree.
La Monte Yarroll: The Name Navigator. Sugar Bowl, in which we introduce glycemic increment.
La Monte Yarroll: And the synoptic Key of Life.
La Monte Yarroll: The Name Navigator is a SQL package to encode cultural awareness of naming practices.
La Monte Yarroll: This is a conceptual model. Names are made of particles, like yarl or piggy.
La Monte Yarroll: Each particle is represented in the target alphabet.
La Monte Yarroll: In a Latinized form, and in the International Phonetic Alphabet for pronunciation.
La Monte Yarroll: The order and use are locale-specific.
La Monte Yarroll: For instance, in Georgian, as spoken in Georgia.
La Monte Yarroll: Formal address is Baton, or Kalbaton.
La Monte Yarroll: Followed by… First given name. Unlike English, where it's Mr. or Ms. followed by last name.
La Monte Yarroll: This is the logical model, which you can compare to the conceptual model at your own leisure.
La Monte Yarroll: Here's an excerpt from the UI wireframe.
La Monte Yarroll: This shows the three encodings of my name, particles, in Georgian as spoken in Georgia.
La Monte Yarroll: In Georgian, all nouns end in a vowel, so Lamont becomes Lamonti.
La Monte Yarroll: Also, there are no diphthongs in Georgian, so Yarl becomes EAROLI.
La Monte Yarroll: This package is available with a permissive license for use in customer relationship management systems.
La Monte Yarroll: Second is the Sugar Bowl project, which we introduced the glycemic increment metric.
La Monte Yarroll: This is a text mining project in individualized medicine.
La Monte Yarroll: This is joint work with Jen Belasi.
La Monte Yarroll: A CGM is a medical device which records blood glucose every 5 minutes.
La Monte Yarroll: On the right, we see the app. The green dots are meal records.
La Monte Yarroll: I've been collecting data on every meal for several years now.
La Monte Yarroll: Here's an initial analysis of the meal descriptions. As you can see, I ate a lot of peanut butter and cheese.
La Monte Yarroll: Internet points to anyone who can spot my favorite restaurants.
La Monte Yarroll: Our goal is to predict Blood sugar consequences of the meals and portions that the patient actually consumes.
La Monte Yarroll: The standard metrics for this, glycemic index and glycemic load, are based on fasting conditions, standardized portions, and are normalized over a population.
La Monte Yarroll: By contrast, glycemic increment applies to the actual foods and portions that the patient consumes.
La Monte Yarroll: Glycemic increment is the area under the glucose curve
La Monte Yarroll: Starting at the level of the start of the meal, and continuing for several hours.
La Monte Yarroll: We applied text mining methods to extract terms and their glycemic increment consequences.
La Monte Yarroll: We can see that things like donuts, croissants, and dried fruit all cause large swings of glycemic increment.
La Monte Yarroll: Foods with glycemic increment near zero are peanut butter, cashews, and cottage cheese with peach preserves.
La Monte Yarroll: It is interesting that the small quantity of peach preserves eaten with cottage cheese has a negligible effect.
La Monte Yarroll: Individualized medicine is a growing field.
La Monte Yarroll: The availability of inexpensive sensors that can provide information from activity, blood pressure, blood oxygen, and in this case, blood glucose, have created a plethora of data.
La Monte Yarroll: Patients can use their own data to produce suitable guidance for controlling blood sugar through diet.
La Monte Yarroll: The last project is the Synoptic Key of Life.
La Monte Yarroll: The goal is to make species descriptions in the open access and public domain mycological literature accessible to the amateur.
La Monte Yarroll: We built this project over 5 courses.
La Monte Yarroll: These are my collaborators.
La Monte Yarroll: Here's an overview of the skull architecture as seen through the classes which implemented components.
La Monte Yarroll: I'll concentrate mainly on machine learning and AI models.
La Monte Yarroll: On the left, we have the websites that we scrape for articles.
La Monte Yarroll: This dark blue block on the right is a PySpark pipeline that builds a classifier to extract species names and their descriptions from the literature.
La Monte Yarroll: These names and descriptions are combined into taxa objects in the light blue box.
La Monte Yarroll: The tacks are then processed in two separate paths.
La Monte Yarroll: The upper path uses an embedding into searchable semantic space with the SBIRT small language model.
La Monte Yarroll: This embedding is then used to find taxa that are similar to a description provided by the user.
La Monte Yarroll: The lower path uses a different small language model, Mistral 7B, which translates the free-form text description into a hierarchical representation of features, subfeatures, and values.
La Monte Yarroll: These representations are refined through constrained decoding, which limits the output to valid JSON structures.
La Monte Yarroll: The vocabulary is then normalized using similarity to published ontologies.
La Monte Yarroll: Finally, we have the website built with Django and React.
La Monte Yarroll: Here's the search page from the website.
La Monte Yarroll: Here we have an in-progress description built by the user. On the right, we have a set of tools for refining the description.
La Monte Yarroll: This is a search result page. We have the full species name and the description from the literature.
La Monte Yarroll: We also provide links to a local PDF, if it's available, and the link back to the original source.
La Monte Yarroll: This is the simplest of the feature tools, which creates nested menus based on the JSON hierarchical representations of descriptions.
La Monte Yarroll: This is a static set of menus and is not tied to the current description.
La Monte Yarroll: These two tools are based on decision tree models built on the fly from the top few taxa that most closely match the current description.
La Monte Yarroll: The decision tree on the left is based on just the text of the taxon.
La Monte Yarroll: the decision… Tree on the right is based on the hierarchical JSON representation.
La Monte Yarroll: The final feature tool helps the user collect statistics for microscopic features, like spores.
La Monte Yarroll: It keeps a permanent record of every measurement.
La Monte Yarroll: The count of samples N turns to green once it gets to 30.
La Monte Yarroll: Metrics can be one-dimensional, for example, the length of parentheses.
La Monte Yarroll: Or two-dimensional, for example, spores.
La Monte Yarroll: 2D measurements can also report Q-value, which is the ratio of length to width. Q-value of 1.0 indicates round spores. Higher Q values indicate more elongated spores.
La Monte Yarroll: The taxonomist can add whatever measurable features they care to.
La Monte Yarroll: Website also includes typical features, like account and settings management.
La Monte Yarroll: My aspiration for the site is to get more people doing descriptive taxonomy for fungi.
La Monte Yarroll: The website currently is in alpha test. I have several small projects planned to improve the classifier before I go beta.
La Monte Yarroll: Here are a few… development themes from the Synoptic Key of Life.
La Monte Yarroll: I recruited and coordinated several teams of fellow students.
La Monte Yarroll: We planned our work and managed risk by using the XP planning game via Trello.
La Monte Yarroll: We used a wide range of open-source technologies, ranging from PostgreSQL to fine-tuning and SLM.
La Monte Yarroll: From my last two classes, I leveraged Claude Code.
La Monte Yarroll: I maintained engineering discipline by using test-driven development and incremental.
La Monte Yarroll: Regression tests, and by applying linters and type checkers.
La Monte Yarroll: I made key architectural decisions based on the availability of compute resources, using traditional classifiers where compute resources were constrained.
La Monte Yarroll: Only resorting to LLMs and SLMs where they offered comp… unique capabilities.
La Monte Yarroll: Here are the links for those interested in diving deeper.
La Monte Yarroll: Thank you.